Skip to Content
wikiHow is where trusted research and expert knowledge come together. Learn why people trust wikiHow
OUTDOOR SAFETYANIMAL AND INSECT SAFETY
What Are Flies Doing When They Rub Their Hands?
Download Article
Spilling the secret about these common household pests
Co-authored by Elmer Bensinger and Hannah Madden
Last Updated: June 21, 2025 Fact Checked
Why Flies Rub Their Limbs Together |How Flies Carry Disease |Flies Throwing Up |Managing Flies




Have you ever wondered why flies stop to rub their tiny hands together? While this gesture may look villainous, these pesky pests actually have a good reason for it. Want to learn more about flies and their behavior? Keep reading for fun info as well as tips on managing flies around your home.
Things You Should Know
Flies rub their hands to clean off their taste receptors. These receptors are all over their bodies, including their legs and wings.
Flies spread disease by landing on feces or trash, picking up bacteria, and then flying around with it.
To manage flies, throw away garbage outside in a sealed container and keep the inside of your home clean.
We often think of flies as gross, dirty pests, so it may come as a surprise to learn that they’re actually cleaning themselves. Flies have small sensors all over their bodies that carry taste receptors. When flies walk around, these sensors can get clogged with dirt, dust, and food particles. So when a fly rubs its little hands together, it’s getting ready to taste its next delicious meal.
If flies are constantly cleaning themselves, you might be wondering how they manage to spread diseases to animals and humans. Unfortunately, a fly’s favorite meal is feces. When they land on their food to eat, they often pick up bacteria that they then spread to other areas when they land again.
It’s not necessarily “throwing up” as we might vomit, but it is a type of saliva that helps dissolve the food a fly lands on. Since flies don’t have teeth, they use their mouths to suck up the saliva and bits of dissolved food so they can eat it properly.
It’s no surprise that flies love eating garbage. If you notice flies in your home, by taking out the trash and putting it into a sealed dumpster outside. Wipe down countertops, sweep up floors, and clean out sinks to make sure there are no food scraps left behind.
House flies tend to congregate around rotted food, but other flies, like fruit flies, like fresh food. Keep fruit flies away by sealing up food in airtight containers.

Sometimes, flies just wander inside your home by accident. If you love keeping the doors and windows open during the summer, so that bugs and pests can’t get in.
Check out other areas of your home that might be letting flies in. Surprisingly, experts note that most flies get in through the attic.
Besides food and trash, flies are also attracted to animal poop outside. If your animal does their business outside your home, pick up their feces and throw it into a sealed trash bag.

That way, the flies won’t have any reason to visit.
If your fly problem just won’t buzz off, use or to solve it. Hang these traps up outside your home where flies tend to congregate, like underneath a covered patio. Clean the traps regularly as dead flies accumulate.
If you buy through links on our site, we may earn a commission.



X
Join us in our mission
For over two decades, we’ve been on a mission: to help everyone in the world learn how to do anything. Our articles are human written and expert endorsed to ensure readers like you get reliable, current information. Before you get back to learning, we would be grateful if you could take a minute to support wikiHow. Any amount helps. Thank you.
Let’s do this!
wikiHow asks for your consent to use your personal data to:
Personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development
Store and/or access information on a device
Learn more
Your personal data will be processed and information from your device (cookies, unique identifiers, and other device data) may be stored by, accessed by and shared with 138 TCF vendor(s) and 67 ad partner(s), or used specifically by this site or app.
Some vendors may process your personal data on the basis of legitimate interest, which you can object to by managing your options below. Look for a link at the bottom of this page or in the site menu to manage or withdraw consent in privacy and cookie settings.
Consent
Do not consent
Manage options